ASP.NET Core with .NET native AOT (preview 3 docs) (#28826)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/native-aot/index.md

* **Reduced startup time**; native AOT applications can show reduced start-up times which means the application is ready to service requests quicker. This can also help during deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the application to another.
* **Reduce memory demand**; native AOT applications can have reduced memory demands depending on the nature of the work being performed by the application. This reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.

## When to avoid using .NET native AOT with ASP.NET Core?

Not all features in ASP.NET Core are currently compatible with .NET native AOT. The following table summarizes ASP.NET Core feature compatability with .NET native AOT:

| Feature                       | Fully Supported | Partially Supported | Not Supported |
| ----------------------------- | --------------- | ------------------- | ------------- |

> | ASP.NET Core Minimal APIs     |                 | Yes[^1]             |               |

Author: I've removed the need for this for now.

using System.Text.Json.Serialization;
using MyFirstAotWebApi;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateSlimBuilder(args);
builder.Logging.AddConsole();

builder.Services.ConfigureHttpJsonOptions(options =>
{
    options.SerializerOptions.AddContext<AppJsonSerializerContext>();
});

var app = builder.Build();

var sampleTodos = TodoGenerator.GenerateTodos().ToArray();

var todosApi = app.MapGroup("/todos");
todosApi.MapGet("/", () => sampleTodos);
todosApi.MapGet("/{id}", (int id) =>
    sampleTodos.FirstOrDefault(a => a.Id == id) is { } todo
        ? Results.Ok(todo)
        : Results.NotFound());

app.Run();

[JsonSerializable(typeof(Todo[]))]
internal partial class AppJsonSerializerContext : JsonSerializerContext
{

}
```

A significant difference is that `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateBuilderSlim` is used to create the web application builder.  The `CreateBuilderSlim` method initializes the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplicationBuilder> with incompatible ASP.NET Core features that are disabled.
<!-- Update the preceding with the following when the .NET 8 API is published :
<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateBuilderSlim%2A>
-->

> Because .NET native AOT is unable to use reflection at runtime we also need to use the source generator to generate the JSON serializer code to support the custom types that are being returned from the minimal API routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The .NET native AOT is unable to use reflection at runtime, therefore the source generator is used to generate the JSON serializer code. The JSON serializer code supports the custom types that are being returned from the minimal API routes.
```

---
title: ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
author: mitchdenny
description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: midenn
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 04/10/2023
uid: native-aot/index
---
# ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT.

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

ASP.NET Core 8.0 introduces support for [.NET native ahead-of-time (AOT)](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/). Not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT at this time. 

* How to get started.
* The benefits and potential drawbacks.
* The limitations.

## Getting started with .NET native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core

> When building an application that is to be published using native AOT the developer should build their application normally. Native AOT compilation occurs when an application is published and the native AOT compiler analyses the code in your application to identify possible coding matterns that are incompatible with AOT. This analysis includes not only all of your code, but also code that you depend on. When warnings are encountered review them and take corrective steps. It is a good idea to publish your application frequently to detect possible issues early in the development lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When developing an app to be published using native AOT, a developer writes their application normally. Native AOT compilation occurs when an app is published, and the native AOT compiler analyses the code in the app to identify coding patterns incompatible with AOT.

Native AOT analysis includes all of the app's code and the libraries the app depends on. Review Native AOT warnings and take corrective steps. It's a good idea to test publishing apps frequently to discover issues early in the development lifecycle.
```

  * Improved deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the app to another.
* **Reduce memory demand**: Native AOT apps can have reduced memory demands depending on the work being performed by the app. Reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.

## ASP.NET Core and AoT Supportability

Not all features in ASP.NET Core are currently compatible with .NET native AOT. The following table summarizes ASP.NET Core feature compatibility with .NET native AOT:

| Feature | Fully Supported | Partially Supported | Not Supported |
| - | - | - | - |
| gRPC | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| Minimal APIs | | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Partially supported</span> | |
| MVC | | | <span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |
| Blazor Server | | |<span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |
| SignalR | | | <span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |

> | Authentication | | | <span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> (JWT soon) |

Reviewer 2: Authentication is one middleware of many. The vast majority of other middleware should work.

I think we should go ahead and include them:

* CORS
* HealthChecks
* HttpLogging
* Localization (test this one first)
* OutputCaching
* RateLimiting
* RequestDecompression
* ResponseCaching
* ResponseCompression
* Rewrite
* Session (put this one under not supported, uses Cryptograph.Xml)
* Spa (put this one under not supported, it's not annotated)
* StaticFiles
* WebSockets

Author: I don't think localization will work because we actually disable it in the template properties (we just use invariant culture).

---
title: ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
author: mitchdenny
description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: midenn
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 04/10/2023
uid: native-aot/index
---
# ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT.

ASP.NET Core 8.0 introduces support for [.NET native ahead-of-time (AOT)](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/). Not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT at this time. 

* How to get started.
* The benefits and potential drawbacks.

> * The limitations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Compatibility aspects.
```

Reviewer: Let's not minimize limitations by leaving it out. Also my intro was removed but it needs some intro, so I added the shorted possible.

```suggestion
ASP.NET Core 8.0 introduces support for [.NET native ahead-of-time (AOT)](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/). Not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT at this time. This article shows:

* How to get started.
* The benefits and potential drawbacks.
* The limitations and compatibility.
```

> * The limitations.

Reviewer 4: I wonder if we want to introduce what native AOT is and what benefits it has before "How to get started.". In my mind the flow is:

1. introduce the concept
2. describe the pros and cons
3. describe how to use it

Author: In the opening paragraph we have a link to the native AOT deployment page which I think gives  pretty good coverage. I was trying to avoid duplicating that content.

In terms of sequencing of prons/cons vs. a basic how to, I generally favor putting tyre kicking content up front. It gives folks a food idea of the basic mechanics (e.g. AOT happens during publish). I initially had it around the way you suggested but then I think @Rick-Anderson made an edit which made it more logical for it to go first (which I agreed with).

## Getting started with .NET native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core

> 

Reviewer: @mitchdenny  review my following change before accepting @MichalStrehovsky change.

> When developing an app to be published using native AOT, a developer writes their application normally. Native AOT compilation occurs when an app is published, and the native AOT compiler analyses the code in the app to identify coding patterns incompatible with AOT.

Reviewer 3: I know what you mean with "developer writes their application normally", but I'm wondering if we can word it differently.

```suggestion
Native AOT is a publishing option - the AOT compilation only happens when the app is published. A project opted into Native AOT publishing will still use JIT for F5 debugging, dotnet run, or dotnet build. There will be some observable differences though: some run time features that are not compatible with Native AOT will be disabled and throw exceptions at run time, and a source analyzer will be enabled to highlight code that is not compatible with Native AOT. At publish time, the entire app (including NuGets) will be analyzed for compatibility once more.
```

Author: I picked up Rick's language.

> When developing an app to be published using native AOT, a developer writes their application normally. Native AOT compilation occurs when an app is published, and the native AOT compiler analyses the code in the app to identify coding patterns incompatible with AOT.

Reviewer: @MichalStrehovsky  The following is your excellent suggest with the MS style guide applied. No future tense. Correct sentences (remove `-`), avoid parenthetical expressions. Split up long sentences.

```suggestion
Native AOT is a publishing option. AOT compilation happens when the app is published. A project opted into Native AOT publishing still uses JIT for F5 debugging, dotnet run, or dotnet build. There are some observable differences:
* Some run time features that aren't compatible with Native AOT are disabled and throw exceptions at run time.
* A source analyzer is enabled to highlight code that isn't compatible with Native AOT. At publish time, the entire app, including NuGet packages, are analyzed for compatibility again.
```

MSBuild version 17.<version> for .NET
  Determining projects to restore...
  Restored C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj (in 241 ms).
C:\Code\dotnet\aspnetcore\.dotnet\sdk\8.0.<version>\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\targets\Microsoft.NET.RuntimeIde
ntifierInference.targets(287,5): message NETSDK1057: You are using a preview version of .NET. See: https://aka.ms/dotne
t-support-policy [C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj]
  MyFirstAotWebApi -> C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\MyFirstAotWebApi.dll
  Generating native code
  MyFirstAotWebApi -> C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish\
```

Note: The preceding output my differ from what you see depending on the version of  .NET 8 used.
Review the contents of output directory:

```
$ dir bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish

    Directory: C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish

Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
----                 -------------         ------ ----
-a---          30/03/2023  1:41 PM        9480704 MyFirstAotWebApi.exe
-a---          30/03/2023  1:41 PM       43044864 MyFirstAotWebApi.pdb
```

> The executable that is produced can be executed on a machine without the runtime installed. When launched it should behave as expected:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The executable is self-contained and doesn't require a .NET runtime to run. When launched it should behave as expected:
```

  * Reduce deployment time from smaller images.
* **Reduced startup time**: Native AOT applications can show reduced start-up times. Reduced start-up means:
  * The app is ready to service requests quicker.
  * Improved deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the app to another.
* **Reduce memory demand**: Native AOT apps can have reduced memory demands depending on the work being performed by the app. Reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.

We ran the template application in our benchmarking lab to see what the differences were in terms of application size, memory use, and CPU and observed the following results:

![Chart showing comparison of application size, memory use and startup time metrics of an AOT published app, a runtime app that is trimmed, and an untrimmed runtime app.](_static/aot-runtime-trimmed-perf-chart.png)

You can see that native AOT has a dramatically lower application size on disk and memory utilization is also lower for our template scenario. Startup time is also significantly reduced. 🚀

> ## ASP.NET Core and AoT Supportability

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## ASP.NET Core and Native AOT Supportability
```

To be consistent with stylization (`AOT` vs `AoT`) in the rest of the document.

| Localization | | |<span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |
| OutputCaching | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| RateLimiting | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| RequestDecompression | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| ResponseCaching | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| ResponseCompression | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| Rewrite | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| Session | | |<span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |
| Spa | | |<span aria-hidden="true">❌</span><span class="visually-hidden">Not supported</span> |
| StaticFiles | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| WebSockets | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |

> It is important to test application functionality thoroughly when moving to a native AOT deployment model to ensure that functionality observed during developmnet (using the runtime) is preserved in the native executable. When building your application, keep an eye out for AOT warnings. An application that produces AOT warnings during publishing is not guaranteed to work correctly. If you don't get any AOT warnings at publish time, you should be confident that your application will work consistently after publishing for AOT as it did during your F5 / `dotnet run` develoment workflow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is important to test application functionality thoroughly when moving to a native AOT deployment model to ensure that functionality observed during development (when the app is untrimmed and JIT-compiled) is preserved in the native executable. When building your application, keep an eye out for AOT warnings. An application that produces AOT warnings during publishing is not guaranteed to work correctly. If you don't get any AOT warnings at publish time, you should be confident that your application will work consistently after publishing for AOT as it did during your F5 / `dotnet run` develoment workflow.
```

---
title: ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
author: mitchdenny
description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: midenn
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 04/10/2023
uid: native-aot/index
---
# ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT.

> :::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Not needed. Page has filter already.

| StaticFiles | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| WebSockets | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |

It is important to test application functionality thoroughly when moving to a native AOT deployment model to ensure that functionality observed during developmnet (using the runtime) is preserved in the native executable. When building your application, keep an eye out for AOT warnings. An application that produces AOT warnings during publishing is not guaranteed to work correctly. If you don't get any AOT warnings at publish time, you should be confident that your application will work consistently after publishing for AOT as it did during your F5 / `dotnet run` develoment workflow.

For more information on AOT warnings and how to address them see; [Introduction to AOT warnings](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/fixing-warnings).

## Known issues

We are keeping track of a number of known issues with native AOT support in ASP.NET Core in [a GitHub issue](https://github.com/dotnet/core/issues/8288).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---

> title: ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: ASP.NET Core support for native AOT
```

author: mitchdenny

> description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for native AOT
```

monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: midenn
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 04/10/2023
uid: native-aot/index
---

> # ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# ASP.NET Core support for native AOT.
```

> ASP.NET Core 8.0 introduces support for [.NET native ahead-of-time (AOT)](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/). Not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT at this time. This article covers:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core 8.0 introduces support for [.NET native ahead-of-time (AOT)](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/). This article covers:
```

Can we turn this "Not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT at this time. " into a yellow warning bar at the top of the article?

cc @Rick-Anderson

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs/pull/28826/files#r1158058640

* How to get started.
* The benefits and potential drawbacks.

> * The limitations and compatibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Compatibility requirements.
```

> ## Getting started with .NET native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Getting started with native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core
```

> ## Getting started with .NET native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> In .NET 8, not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT.

## Getting started with .NET native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core
```

> Native AOT is a publishing option. AOT compilation happens when the app is published. A project opted into Native AOT publishing still uses JIT for F5 debugging, dotnet run, or dotnet build. There are some observable differences:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Native AOT is a publishing option. AOT compilation happens when the app is published. A project opted into native AOT publishing still uses JIT for F5 debugging, `dotnet run`, or `dotnet build`. There are some observable differences:
```

> Native AOT is a publishing option. AOT compilation happens when the app is published. A project opted into Native AOT publishing still uses JIT for F5 debugging, dotnet run, or dotnet build. There are some observable differences:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Native AOT is a publishing option. AOT compilation happens when the app is published. A project opted into Native AOT publishing still uses JIT compilation when debugging, dotnet run, or dotnet build. There are some observable differences:
```

> * Some run time features that aren't compatible with Native AOT are disabled and throw exceptions at run time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Some features that aren't compatible with native AOT are disabled and throw exceptions at runtime.
```

> * A source analyzer is enabled to highlight code that isn't compatible with Native AOT. At publish time, the entire app, including NuGet packages, are analyzed for compatibility again.

Reviewer 5: We should show an example of an incompatible API and the experience at build and publish (of what the warnings look like).

Author: Will do this in a second pass. I think we need to break this page up. Just like in the main AOT docs there is a sub page for fixing warnings.

> Native AOT analysis includes all of the app's code and the libraries the app depends on. Review Native AOT warnings and take corrective steps. It's a good idea to test publishing apps frequently to discover issues early in the development lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Native AOT analysis includes all of the app's code and the libraries the app depends on. Review native AOT warnings and take corrective steps. It's a good idea to test publishing apps frequently to discover issues early in the development lifecycle.
```

> To help developers get started deploying with .NET native AOT in ASP.NET Core, use the:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To help developers get started deploying with native AOT in ASP.NET Core, use the:
```

* AOT API template which includes customizations to remove unsupported components from the app.

> * ```dotnet new``` command to create a new ASP.NET Core API app that is configured to work with .NET native AOT:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ```dotnet new``` command to create a new ASP.NET Core API app that is configured to work with native AOT:
```

```
$ dotnet new api -aot -o MyFirstAotWebApi && cd MyFirstAotWebApi
The template "ASP.NET Core API" was created successfully.

Processing post-creation actions...
Restoring C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj:
  Determining projects to restore...
  Restored C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj (in 302 ms).
Restore succeeded.
```

> Use the following command to verify an app can but published using .NET native AOT:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the following command to verify an app can but published using native AOT:
```

  Generating native code
  MyFirstAotWebApi -> C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish\
```

Note: The preceding output my differ from what you see depending on the version of  .NET 8 used.
Review the contents of output directory:

```
$ dir bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish

    Directory: C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish

Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
----                 -------------         ------ ----
-a---          30/03/2023  1:41 PM        9480704 MyFirstAotWebApi.exe
-a---          30/03/2023  1:41 PM       43044864 MyFirstAotWebApi.pdb
```

The executable is self-contained and doesn't require a .NET runtime to run. When launched it should behave as expected:

```
$ .\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish\MyFirstAotWebApi.exe
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[14]
      Now listening on: http://localhost:5000
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[0]
      Application started. Press Ctrl+C to shut down.
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[0]
      Hosting environment: Production
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[0]
      Content root path: C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi
```

> The `Program.cs` source file contains some changes for publishing to .NET native AOT. A significant difference is that `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateSlimBuilder` is used to create the web application builder.  The `CreateSlimBuilder` method initializes the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplicationBuilder> with the minimal ASP.NET Core features necessary to run an application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Program.cs` source file contains some changes for publishing to native AOT. A significant difference is that `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateSlimBuilder` is used to create the web application builder.  The `CreateSlimBuilder` method initializes the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplicationBuilder> with the minimal ASP.NET Core features necessary to run an application.
```

<!-- Update the preceding with the following when the .NET 8 API is published :
<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateBuilderSlim%2A>
-->

```csharp
var builder = WebApplication.CreateSlimBuilder(args);
```

> Because this template uses JSON to serialize responses, we need to explicitly provide a `JsonSerializerContext` which specifies the custom types that we need to serialize so that the JSON source generator knows what to produce code for.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This template uses JSON to serialize responses, to enable JSON serialization with native AOT, we need to explicitly provide a `JsonSerializerContext` which specifies the custom types that we need to serialize so that the JSON source generator knows what to produce code for.
```

We should link to the JSON source generator docs https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json/source-generation

Author: Done.

```csharp
builder.Services.ConfigureHttpJsonOptions(options =>
{
    options.SerializerOptions.AddContext<AppJsonSerializerContext>();
});

// Other code trimmed for brevity.

[JsonSerializable(typeof(Todo[]))]
internal partial class AppJsonSerializerContext : JsonSerializerContext
{

}
```

> Because unused code is trimmed during publishing for Native AOT, the application cannot use unbounded reflection at runtime. Source generators are used to produce code to avoid the need for reflection. In some cases source generators produce code optimized for AOT even when a generator is not strictly required. To view source code that is generated based on the code in ```Program.cs``` modify the ```MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj``` to include the ```<EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>true</EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>``` property. Example:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When using native AOT, unused code is trimmed during publishing to reduce the size of the final binary. This can break applications or libraries that rely on reflection at runtime. Source generators are used to produce code to avoid the need for reflection. In some cases source generators produce code optimized for AOT even when a generator is not strictly required. To view source code that is generated based on the code in ```Program.cs``` modify the ```MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj``` to include the ```<EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>true</EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>``` property. Example:
```

I would link to the runtime document that describes how to build trimmer friendly APIs and how to describe reflection.

Author: This was previously When ... but was changed for style guide reasons. Ack on link.

Author: I won't take this suggestion for now @davidfowl but I do think we need to some how point folks to docs about how to build trim-safe APIs in their own code. I'm not sure this is an ASP.NET specific problem though. I've got a link to the main native AOT landing page.

I think we we were going to have a discussion of trim safe APIs in our doc tree then we'd want to make it cover patterns that come up frequently in ASP.NET Core apps in particular. Maybe a sub-page in the TOC?

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <!-- Other properties ommitted for brevity -->
    <EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>true</EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>
  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

With the project file updated, run the `dotnet build` command (`publish` isn't necessary to view generated code). In the built output file there will be a `obj/Debug/net8.0/generated/` directory which contains all the generated files for the project.

When `dotnet publish` is run, the project source files and generated source files are compiled as normal and then outputted assemblies are passed into an native IL compiler which produces the native executable which contains the native machine code to run the application.

> ## Benefits of using .NET native AOT with ASP.NET Core

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Benefits of using native AOT with ASP.NET Core
```

> Using the .NET native AOT deployment model provides the following benefits:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Publishing and deploying a native AOT app provides the following benefits:
```

  * Reduce deployment time from smaller images.
* **Reduced startup time**: Native AOT applications can show reduced start-up times. Reduced start-up means:
  * The app is ready to service requests quicker.
  * Improved deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the app to another.
* **Reduce memory demand**: Native AOT apps can have reduced memory demands depending on the work being performed by the app. Reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.

We ran the template application in our benchmarking lab to see what the differences were in terms of application size, memory use, and CPU and observed the following results:

![Chart showing comparison of application size, memory use and startup time metrics of an AOT published app, a runtime app that is trimmed, and an untrimmed runtime app.](_static/aot-runtime-trimmed-perf-chart.png)

You can see that native AOT has a dramatically lower application size on disk and memory utilization is also lower for our template scenario. Startup time is also significantly reduced. 🚀

> ## ASP.NET Core and Native AOT Supportability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## ASP.NET Core and native AOT compatibility
```
Supportability is apparently a real word - https://www.google.com/search?q=supportability - but compatibility feels like it makes more sense to me.

> Not all features in ASP.NET Core are currently compatible with .NET native AOT. The following table summarizes ASP.NET Core feature compatibility with .NET native AOT:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not all features in ASP.NET Core are currently compatible with native AOT. The following table summarizes ASP.NET Core feature compatibility with native AOT:
```

| StaticFiles | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |
| WebSockets | <span aria-hidden="true">✔️</span><span class="visually-hidden">Fully supported</span> | | |

It is important to test your application thoroughly when moving to a native AOT deployment model to ensure that functionality observed during development (when the app is untrimmed and JIT-compiled) is preserved in the native executable. When building your application, keep an eye out for AOT warnings. An application that produces AOT warnings during publishing is not guaranteed to work correctly. If you don't get any AOT warnings at publish time, you should be confident that your application will work consistently after publishing for AOT as it did during your F5 / `dotnet run` develoment workflow.

For more information on AOT warnings and how to address them see; [Introduction to AOT warnings](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/fixing-warnings).

## Known issues

We are keeping track of a number of known issues with native AOT support in ASP.NET Core in [a GitHub issue](https://github.com/dotnet/core/issues/8288).

> :::moniker-end

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
You don't have ` :::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-9.0"` as it's not needed so can't have an end.
File should end in blank line

---
title: ASP.NET Core support for native AOT
author: mitchdenny
description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for native AOT
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: midenn
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 04/10/2023
uid: native-aot/index
---

> # ASP.NET Core support for native AOT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# ASP.NET Core support for native AOT
```

---
title: ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
author: mitchdenny
description: Learn about ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-8.0'
ms.author: midenn
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 04/10/2023
uid: native-aot/index
---
# ASP.NET Core support for .NET native AOT.

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0"

> ASP.NET Core 8.0 introduces support for [.NET native ahead-of-time (AOT)](/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/). Not all ASP.NET Core features are compatible with native AOT at this time. This article shows the following for native AOT support in ASP.NET Core:

Reviewer 4: this link doesn't work in the preview. is that expected?

* How to get started.
* The benefits and potential drawbacks.
* The limitations.

## Getting started with .NET native AOT deployment in ASP.NET Core

> To help developers get started deploying with .NET native AOT in ASP.NET Core, use the:

Reviewer 2: I think this section focuses too much on the api template. We need to introduce people to some basic concepts:
* Apps are developed normally
* Native AOT happens on publish
* Warnings alert you to possible AOT incompatibilities in your app.

Then, once we've introduced those basic concepts, walk people through using the api template.

Author: Do you mean just outline it like you have there in terms of the workflow? I'm thinking background information would be more completely covered here:

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/deploying/native-aot/

Is there a critical subset that we should cover here?

Reviewer 2: I agree that we shouldn't try to repeat what is in the linked doc.

I think the bullet points above are the important things for people to know before they get started. Then a link to that doc for more information. Then go through using the api template as an example.

* AOT API template which includes customizations to remove unsupported components from the app.
* ```dotnet new``` command to create a new ASP.NET Core API app that is configured to work with .NET native AOT:

```powershell

> PS> dotnet new api -aot -n MyFirstAotWebApi && cd MyFirstAotWebApi

Reviewer 6: Nit: I believe we typically tend to use `-o FolderName` in our samples.

Also, I notice this is a `powershell` text type. Do we want to include the tabbed panels for different targets or use the more generic CLI format so people don't assume this is Windows-only?

  Determining projects to restore...
  Restored C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj (in 241 ms).
C:\Code\dotnet\aspnetcore\.dotnet\sdk\8.0.<version>\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\targets\Microsoft.NET.RuntimeIde
ntifierInference.targets(287,5): message NETSDK1057: You are using a preview version of .NET. See: https://aka.ms/dotne
t-support-policy [C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj]
  MyFirstAotWebApi -> C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\MyFirstAotWebApi.dll
  Generating native code
  MyFirstAotWebApi -> C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish\
```

Note: The preceding output my differ from what you see depending on the version of  .NET 8 used.
Review the contents of output directory:

```
PS> dir bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish

    Directory: C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish

Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
----                 -------------         ------ ----
-a---          30/03/2023  1:41 PM        9480704 MyFirstAotWebApi.exe
-a---          30/03/2023  1:41 PM       43044864 MyFirstAotWebApi.pdb
```

> The API template with AOT enabled produces a binary of about 9.4MB on Windows, although the size may vary depending on the build of .NET 8.0 used. The executable can be run to a machine without the .NET Core runtime installed.

Reviewer 6: Given that it might change, I think we don't need to document it here. It probably makes sense to document this in each release blog post instead of in the fixed docs.

```
PS> .\bin\Release\net8.0\win-x64\publish\MyFirstAotWebApi.exe
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[14]
      Now listening on: http://localhost:5000
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[0]
      Application started. Press Ctrl+C to shut down.
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[0]
      Hosting environment: Production
info: Microsoft.Hosting.Lifetime[0]
      Content root path: C:\Code\Demos\MyFirstAotWebApi
```

The `Program.cs` source file contains some changes for publishing to .NET native AOT:

> ```csharp

Reviewer 6: It might be helpful to pull out the parts that are different into separate code blocks to make it more clear to the reader.

using System.Text.Json.Serialization;
using MyFirstAotWebApi;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateSlimBuilder(args);
builder.Logging.AddConsole();

builder.Services.ConfigureHttpJsonOptions(options =>
{
    options.SerializerOptions.AddContext<AppJsonSerializerContext>();
});

var app = builder.Build();

var sampleTodos = TodoGenerator.GenerateTodos().ToArray();

var todosApi = app.MapGroup("/todos");
todosApi.MapGet("/", () => sampleTodos);
todosApi.MapGet("/{id}", (int id) =>
    sampleTodos.FirstOrDefault(a => a.Id == id) is { } todo
        ? Results.Ok(todo)
        : Results.NotFound());

app.Run();

[JsonSerializable(typeof(Todo[]))]
internal partial class AppJsonSerializerContext : JsonSerializerContext
{

}
```

> A significant difference is that `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateBuilderSlim` is used to create the web application builder.  The `CreateBuilderSlim` method initializes the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplicationBuilder> with incompatible ASP.NET Core features that are disabled.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A significant difference is that `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateSlimBuilder` is used to create the web application builder.  The `CreateSlimBuilder` method initializes the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplicationBuilder> with the minimal ASP.NET Core features necessary to run an application.
```

<!-- Update the preceding with the following when the .NET 8 API is published :
<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.WebApplication.CreateBuilderSlim%2A>
-->

> Native AOT is unable to use reflection at runtime. Source generators are used to produce code to avoid the need for reflection. In some cases source generators produce code optimized for AOT even when a generator is not strictly required. To view source code that is generated based on the code in ```Program.cs``` modify the ```MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj``` to include the ```<EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>true</EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>``` property. Example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Because unused code is trimmed during publishing for Native AOT, the application cannot use unbounded reflection at runtime. Source generators are used to produce code to avoid the need for reflection. In some cases source generators produce code optimized for AOT even when a generator is not strictly required. To view source code that is generated based on the code in ```Program.cs``` modify the ```MyFirstAotWebApi.csproj``` to include the ```<EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>true</EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>``` property. Example:
```

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net8.0</TargetFramework>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <ServerGarbageCollection>false</ServerGarbageCollection>
    <InvariantGlobalization>true</InvariantGlobalization>

>     <PublishAot>true</PublishAot>

Reviewer 4: I wonder if we want to leave these other properties out.  They will be changing over time, for example `ServerGarbageCollection`.

Author: Will remove them and leave a comment.

    <EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles>true</EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles> <!-- Added to emit generated files -->
  </PropertyGroup>

</Project>
```

With the project file updated, run the ```dotnet build``` command (```publish``` isn't necessary to view generated code). In the built output file there will be a ```obj/Debug/net8.0/generated/``` directory which contains all the generated files for the project.

> When ```dotnet publish``` is run, the project source files and generated source files are compiled as normal and then outputted assemblies are passed into an native IL linker which produces the native executable which no longer requires the .NET runtime to be installed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When ```dotnet publish``` is run, the project source files and generated source files are compiled as normal and then outputted assemblies are passed into an native IL compiler which produces the native executable which contains the native machine code to run the application.
```

## Benefits of using .NET native AOT with ASP.NET Core

> Using the .NET native AOT deployment model provides the following benefits:

Reviewer 2: Be bold and give some numbers! "Reduced startup time" is nice, but the reader will want to know much it has been reduced by.

I know numbers will move, but we can update the doc again in the future if we need to.

> * **Minimize disk footprint**; when publishing using native AOT a single executable is produced containing just the code from external dependencies that is used to support the program. Reduced executable size can lead to smaller container images (in containerized deployment scenarios) which can reduce deployment time.

Reviewer 2: Add numbers for single file vs trimmed single file vs Native AOT

* **Reduced startup time**; native AOT applications can show reduced start-up times which means the application is ready to service requests quicker. This can also help during deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the application to another.

> * **Reduce memory demand**; native AOT applications can have reduced memory demands depending on the nature of the work being performed by the application. This reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.

Reviewer 2: Does our benchmark show the memory usage improvement of Native AOT.

> ## When using .NET native AOT with ASP.NET Core should be avoided

Reviewer 6: This heading title is kind of confusing...

```suggestion
## ASP.NET Core and AoT Supportability
```

> * **Minimize disk footprint**; when publishing using native AOT a single executable is produced containing just the code from external dependencies that is used to support the program. Reduced executable size can lead to smaller container images (in containerized deployment scenarios) which can reduce deployment time.
> * **Reduced startup time**; native AOT applications can show reduced start-up times which means the application is ready to service requests quicker. This can also help during deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the application to another.
> * **Reduce memory demand**; native AOT applications can have reduced memory demands depending on the nature of the work being performed by the application. This reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Minimize disk footprint**: When publishing using native AOT a single executable is produced containing just the code from external dependencies that is used to support the program. Reduced executable size can lead to:
  * Smaller container images, for example in containerized deployment scenarios.
  * Reduce deployment time from smaller images.
* **Reduced startup time**: Native AOT applications can show reduced start-up times. Reduced start-up means:
  * The app is ready to service requests quicker.
  * Improved deployment where container orchestrators need manage transition from one version of the app to another.
* **Reduce memory demand**: Native AOT apps can have reduced memory demands depending on the work being performed by the app. Reduced memory consumption can lead to greater deployment density and improved scalability.
```

Not all features in ASP.NET Core are currently compatible with .NET native AOT. The following table summarizes ASP.NET Core feature compatibility with .NET native AOT:

| Feature                       | Fully Supported | Partially Supported | Not Supported        |
| ----------------------------- | --------------- | ------------------- | -------------------- |

> | Minimal APIs                  |                 | Yes                 |                      |

Reviewer 2: Add gRPC as fully supported 🚀

| MVC                           |                 |                     | No                   |

> | Blazor                        |                 |                     | No                   |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Blazor Server                 |                 |                     | No                   |
```

| SignalR                       |                 |                     | No                   |

> | Authentication                |                 |                     | No (JWT coming soon) |

Reviewer 4: We will need to remember to update this table as we add features.

> It is important to test application functionality thoroughly when moving to a native AOT deployment model to ensure that functionality observed during developmnet (using the runtime) is preserved in the native executable.

Reviewer 4: We should also talk about AOT warnings here. Basically if you get any warnings, your app is not guaranteed to work correctly. If you get don't get any AOT warnings at publish-time, you should be confident that your application will work the same after publishing for AOT as it did during F5 / `dotnet run` time.

> In addition to API compatability, deploying ASP.NET Core apps (without native AOT) can be more efficient in some scenarios. For example, when a container image is created for an app that is based on the ASP.NET Core base images, an additional layer is created containing just the binaries which are often smaller than the native AOT binary. The nodes that host the container images might contain a cached copy of the base layers of the container image. If they do, the time to download the additional layer can be small.The benefits of .NET native AOT deployment of ASP.NET Core apps depends heavily on the details of the deployment strategy.

Reviewer 4: > In addition to API compatability, deploying ASP.NET Core apps (without native AOT) can be more efficient in some scenarios.

It took me a few times of reading this sentence before I fully understood what it was trying to say. Is there a clearer way of saying this?

Author: Maybe I should just leave it out. The main thrust of my argument here is that if you are looking at native AOT primarily from a disk footprint saving perspective then there are probably ways of doing it that don't involve quite as many compromises at native AOT. For example - making suring that you are using container image layering effectively.

## Known issues

> ### 8.0-preview3

Reviewer 6: I think it's better to link to the issue in the repo here instead of having to keep the two places in sync.

> #### Request Delegate Generator

Reviewer 4: Do we want to duplicate these here? or just link to https://github.com/dotnet/core/issues/8288?

Author: Changing to a link.
